                         Science Arts & Métiers (SAM)
    is an open access repository that collects the work of Arts et Métiers Institute of
  Technology researchers and makes it freely available over the web where possible.



             This is an author-deposited version published in: https://sam.ensam.eu
                          Handle ID: .http://hdl.handle.net/10985/24362



To cite this version :

Giacomo GOLI, Rémi CURTI, Luigi TODARO, Bertrand MARCON - Specific cutting coefficients
for the most common engineered wood products - In: 25th International Wood Machining
Seminar, Japon, 2023-10-04 - 25th International Wood Machining Seminar - 2023




Any correspondence concerning this service should be sent to the repository
                Administrator : scienceouverte@ensam.eu
Specific cutting coefficients for the most common engineered
                         wood products
                                 G. Goli1, R. Curti2, L. Todaro3, B. Marcon4
                                    1
                                        DAGRI, University of Firenze, Italy
                                   2
                                        ICA, University Toulouse III, France
                                    3
                                        SAFE, University of Basilicata, Italy
                       4
                           LaBoMaP, Arts et Metiers Institute of Technology, France
                                          e-mail: Giacomo.goli@unifi.it




ABSTRACT
The aim of the present work is to investigate the specific cutting coefficients for the assessment of cutting
forces when peripheral milling different types of engineered wood products (EWPs). The approach comes
from previous work aiming to investigate the specific cutting coefficients when cutting solid wood with
different grain orientations. The model inputs are the uncut chip thickness and width, the machining
configuration i.e. up- or down-milling, the type of EWP, and the tool helix angle. Thereby, different EWPs
were round shaped (peripheral milling) machined after being fixed on a dynamometric platform in order to
measure the cutting forces when up- or down-milling with different chip thicknesses and tool helical angles.
The acquired forces were analysed and plotted against the respective chip thicknesses to calculate the
specific cutting coefficients as well as the intercepts to serve as input to the model. The EWPs assessed
were: particleboard, MDF (Medium Density Fiberboard), OSB (Oriented Strand Board), and plywood.
While particleboard and MDF has shown a perfectly isotropic behaviour, plywood has shown to be
moderately directional. OSB has exhibited very large and unpredictable variations associated to its very
heterogeneous structure that makes the cutting forces of this material very difficult to be effectively
modelled.
Keywords: Engineered wood products, cutting forces, specific cutting coefficients.


INTRODUCTION
        An accurate model for predicting cutting forces and cutting powers in wood machining could be of
great help for manufacturers for a correct machining set-up. The research on wood machining has seen
different approaches to cutting forces and cutting power predictions on massive wood and Engineered Wood
Products (EWPs). The strong anisotropy of massive wood results in a very complex interaction between the
tool and the material, depending on the cutting direction compared to the grain orientation, and in very
different cutting conditions. The relations between the grain orientation and the cutting forces have been
explored by different authors and the principal works are gathered together by some review works published
by Marchal et al. [1], Naylor and Hackney [2], and Nasir and Cool [3].
        More recently the attention of the authors of this work went back to investigate how the cutting
forces varies when milling at intermediate grain orientations. A new method for the assessment of wood
machinability and cutting tool performance when machining solid wood at different grain orientations was
proposed by Goli and Sandak [4], where a massive piece of wood was machined at round shape. The same
principle was applied in order to develop a method to measure the cutting forces when peripheral milling
massive wood at different grain orientations (see Figure 1), this first approach being described by Goli et.
al. [5] and presented during the previous (24th) International Wood Machining seminar [6]. This last has
shown to work very effectively and a generalized model for solid wood was hereby developed by Curti at.
al. [7].




   Figure 1. Milling operation schematized with the definition of the reference system and the cutting
forces. The forces were measured on the thickened half disk both for up- and down-milling processes. The
up-milling was used as reference and the down milling forces vector order was reversed in order to be the
                                      same of the up-milling one.
       Curti et al. work is here extended, with the same approach, to determine the specific cutting
coefficients when machining EWPs such as particleboard, Medium Density Fiberboard (MDF), Oriented
Strand Board (OSB), and plywood. Those EWPs are widely machined, and thus representative, for the
secondary transformation sector, and for this reason, they are of interest to optimize the machining processes
and eventually reducing the postprocessing interventions such as sanding to reach the desired final surface
quality. Being MDF and particleboard isotropic materials, they are compared to plywood and OSB that are
supposed to have two anisotropic orthotropic models superposed because produced by superposing layers
with perpendicular grain orientations.


MATERIALS AND METHODS
       For massive wood, the method was conceived to machine a wood specimen into a round shape in
order to cut, with a single operation, with every possible grain orientation compared to the cutting edge. The
specimen is fixed on top of a dynamometric platform (Kistler, type 9255A) that allows to measure directly
the global cutting forces, and the platform itself is clamped on the machine worktable, see Figure 2. The
specimens are machined by peripheral milling. The method is deeply described in the research work [7],
and the data analysis is detailed in [5].
            Figure 2. Peripheral milling setup used for the measurement of the cutting forces.
      Four different EWPs are studied for their major importance in the furniture sector: particleboard,
Medium Density Fiberboard, Oriented Strand Board, and plywood, referenced here respectively as PB,
MDF, OSB, and PW. Their characteristics are summarized in Table 1. The axial depth of cut (𝑎𝑝 ) used for
the experiments is always equal to the whole thickness of the specimen and the routing bit during machining
crossed over both panel’s surfaces.


                           Table 1. Main physical properties of the machined EWPs.
                                           Particle      Medium Density        Oriented Strand
                                                                                                  Plywood
                Type of EWP                 board         Fiberboard               Board
                                                                                                   (PW)
                                             (PB)           (MDF)                  (OSB)
          Wood specie of the EWP             NA                NA                   NA             Poplar
              Density (kg.m-3)              737.8              720.0               585.7           430.0
            Moisture content (%)             11.2               9.7                  8.8            8.7



       Two uncoated, freshly sharpened, tungsten carbide massive tools, 20 mm of diameter, 2 cutting edges,
specially designed for the purpose of the experiment provided by G3 Fantacci Corp. (located at Poggibonsi,
Italy) are tested, with a special interest in the effect of the helix angle (λ), as summarized in Table 2 and
shown in Figures 2-5. Indeed, this parameter is commonly used to virtually increase the sharpness of the
tool and to improve the cutting quality as well as to reduce the cutting forces on the machine XY plane.


        Table 2. Geometrical characteristics of the 2 cutting tools. Rake, wedge and clearing angles are
                        referred to the normal plane. WC is tungsten carbide.
                                                       Rake            Wedge      Clearance
                            Diameter     Number of
         Blade type                                    angle           angle        angle        Material
                             (mm)         teeth -z
                                                        (°)             (°)          (°)
       Straight blade                                                                            Uncoated
                                 20          2           25             55           10
          (λ = 0°)                                                                                 WC
       Helical cutter                                                                            Uncoated
                                 20          2           25             55           10
         (λ = 30°)                                                                                 WC


       Five depths of cut are tested: 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 mm to machine with five different uncut chip
thicknesses (ℎ). This results in an average uncut chip thicknesses varying from 40 μm (for the smallest depth
of cut) to 100 μm (for the largest depth of cut). The data are analysed according to the method described in
Goli et. al. [5] to compute the specific cutting coefficients (𝐾𝑠 ) and the intercepts (𝐼𝑛𝑡) as in the following
equation:
                                    𝐹𝐶 (𝜃) = (𝐾𝑠 (𝜃) × ℎ + 𝐼𝑛𝑡(𝜃)) × 𝑎𝑝


       These two regression coefficients for each grain orientation (𝜃) will allow to estimate the cutting
forces prior to machining EWPs in similar conditions (helix angle, cutting speed) whatever the machining
direction.
       The machining has been performed on a milling center designed for metal cutting produced by the
Gambin Corp. type 120CR with a very stiff worktable than usual machining centers for wood; as a direct
consequence, the forces signals are less polluted by dynamical effects due to the oscillation of the whole
system. The machining conditions were all the same for every material: spindle speed 3,000 rpm; feed rate
2,000 mm/min; axial depth of cut (the force value was normalized by sample thickness); radial depth of cut:
0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 mm.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
       The forces are acquired and normalised over the chip width (board thickness) in order to get the forces
per millimeter of blade length engaged in the cut. These normalized forces are plotted against chip thickness
and the best linear regression is computed in order to determine both cutting forces model parameters: the
intercept (Int.), and the specific cutting coefficient (Ks). The values of Int. and Ks are determined for the
different EWPs with a span of 10° over the angular position over the half disk. In Figure 3 and 4 are reported
the Int. and the Ks when up-milling or down-milling the different boards with a straight blade tool (λ = 0°).




                        (a)                                               (b)                            (c)
        Figure 3. Intercept (Int.) for a straight blade tool in up-milling condition (a) and in down-milling
 condition (b) when machining OSB, MDF, particleboard (PC), Plywood (PW) with (c) the straight blade
                                                  tool (λ = 0°)
       As it can be observed the values of Int. are not negligible when machining with a straight blade tool
and must be taken into account, while when machining with a 30° of axial angle becomes almost negligible.
It can also be observed how machining semi anisotropic materials such as plywood or OSB, results in much
more scattered values compared to quasi isotropic material such as MDF or particle boards. As a general
rule the behaviour of Int. does not seem to be very influenced by the machining strategy (up- or down-
milling).
                       (a)                                              (b)                           (c)

      Figure 4. Specific cutting coefficient (Ks) for a straight blade tool in up-milling condition (a) and
 in down-milling condition (b) when machining OSB, MDF, particleboard (PC), Plywood (PW) with (c)
                                     the straight blade tool (λ=0°)
       By comparing Int. at λ = 0° and at λ = 30°, Figure 3 and 5, it is clear how these values are much lower
and less scattered for λ = 30°. As a general behaviour, the machining with λ = 30°, compared to the λ = 0°,
results in a much lower Ks (that means lower cutting forces when machining); and in a rather negligible Int.
(Figures 3 and 5).




                       (a)                                                (b)                           (c)
       Figure 5. Intercept (Int.) for a straight blade tool in up-milling condition (a) and in down-milling
  condition (b) when machining OSB, MDF, particleboard (PC), Plywood (PW) with (c) the 30° helical
                                             angle tool (λ = 30°)


      Looking at Ks (Figure 4 and 6), it can be observed how up-milling generally results in lower values
compared to down-milling, how MDF results perfectly isotropic, how PB result non perfectly isotropic, how
OSB generally produces a very scattered behavior on the angular position. and how plywood results in a
mirrored behaviour between 0 to 90° and 90 to 180° (especially for λ = 30) showing a repeated pattern
depending on its moderately anisotropic structure.
                        (a)                                               (b)                           (c)
      Figure 6. Specific cutting coefficient (Ks) for a straight blade tool in up-milling condition (a) and
 in down-milling condition (b) when machining OSB, MDF, particleboard (PC), Plywood (PW) with (c)
                                  the 30° helical angle tool (λ = 30°)


CONCLUSIONS
       The work allowed to identify the regression coefficients able to calculate the cutting forces when
machining the principal engineered wood products. Intercepts and specific cutting coefficients were
calculated for up-milling and down-milling cutting conditions as well as for two different helical angles
being 0 and 30°. Isotropic materials have shown the same behaviour over the whole semi circumference
machined while plywood, because of its compensated structure has shown a semi anisotropic behaviour.
Conversely, OSB has shown a highly scattered behaviour over the semi circumference possibly because of
its higher localized variability in density compared to the other products due to the presence of empty parts.
Down-milling has generally shown higher Ks compared to up-milling. A higher helical angle allows a much
lower Ks (less power is needed to cut the material) and almost negligible Int. (less energy is needed to create
the chip) and a much less scattered signal for all the machined EWPs as expected.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
       Giacomo Goli would like to acknowledge the Art et Metiers Institute of Technology (ENSAM, Cluny
campus, France) for financing 2 visiting researcher period respectively of 1 and 2 months in LaBoMaP.
Authors also want to acknowledge Gianluca Fantacci (G3 Fantacci Corp) for designing and providing the
three cutting tools used during the core experimental campaign of this study.


REFERENCES
[1] R. Marchal, F. Mothe, L. E. Denaud, B. Thibaut, e L. Bleron, «Cutting forces in wood machining -
    Basics and applications in industrial processes. A review. COST Action E35 2004-2008: Wood
    machining - Micromechanics and fracture», Holzforschung, vol. 63, fasc. 2, pp. 157–167, 2009, doi:
    10.1515/HF.2009.014.
[2] A. Naylor e P. Hackney, «A Review of Wood Machining Literature with a Special Focus on Sawing»,
    BioResources, vol. 8, fasc. 2, pp. 3122–3135, 2013.
[3] V. Nasir e J. Cool, «A review on wood machining: characterization, optimization, and monitoring of
    the sawing process», Wood Mater. Sci. Eng., vol. 15, fasc. 1, pp. 1–16, gen. 2020, doi:
    10.1080/17480272.2018.1465465.
[4] G. Goli e J. Sandak, «Proposal of a new method for the rapid assessment of wood machinability and
    cutting tool performance in peripheral milling», Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., vol. 74, fasc. 6, pp. 867–
    874, nov. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s00107-016-1053-y.
[5] G. Goli et al., «Specific Cutting Forces of Isotropic and Orthotropic Engineered Wood Products by
    Round Shape Machining», Materials, vol. 11, fasc. 12, p. 2575, dic. 2018, doi: 10.3390/ma11122575.
[6] R. Curti, B. Marcon, R. Furferi, L. Denaud, e G. Goli, «Specific cutting coefficients at different grain
    orientations determined during real machining operations», in IWMS-24 Proceedings, Corvallis
    (USA): Gary Schajer, 30/8 2019, pp. 53–62.
[7] R. Curti, B. M. L. Denaud, e M. T. R. Furferi, «Generalized cutting force model for peripheral milling
    of wood , based on the effect of density , uncut chip cross section , grain orientation and tool helix
    angle», Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., fasc. 2004, 2021, doi: 10.1007/s00107-021-01667-5.
